# EEGDecodingElectrodePlacement
**Abstract**
In the past decade, Multivariate Pattern Analysis (i.e., decoding) has become increasingly utilized in studies of neural processes. Identifying optimal methods in this domain thus has significant value in improving the sensitivity and power of future EEG neural decoding work. With this aim in mind, this study will investigate the influence of electrode count on the magnitude and reliability of neural decoding in electroencephalography (EEG) in the context of visual processing. Specifically, we will evaluate differences in the decoding of visual scene identity across five electrode montages, varying in number (64\32\16) and positioning of electrodes (distributed vs. high-density posterior). These montages will be created by subsetting 64-channel data recorded from 20 subjects viewing real-world scenes. We hypothesize that (1) the increase in spatial resolution from a higher number of electrodes, as well as (2) an increase in electrode density over posterior sites (which are more likely to record activity from the visual cortex), would enhance the reliability, and thus the observed effect size, of visual scene identity decoding from scalp-based EEG recordings. This investigation will provide valuable insights in identifying optimal balance points between reliable measurement and practical considerations such as cost, comfort, and setup time.

**1. Introduction**
Recording the electrical activity of the brain using electroencephalograph (EEG) signals has emerged as a popular non-invasive approach for capturing the dynamic voltage
patterns within the human brain (Abhijith et al., 2021). The electrical recordings provide time-point specific Event-Related-Potentials (ERPs) which can be extracted from the continuous EEG waveform. ERPs provide a record of brain activity as it is associated with responses to cognitive events in response to tasks and information processing. These work together to measure brain activity as it occurs in time ([cite] and rephrase), offering exceptional temporal resolution for neuroimaging research among diverse applications such as clinical diagnosis, behavioral activity decoding, and sleep monitoring. The models that can be used to study the relationship between stimulus and brain response include traditional forward models, which map stimulus to brain response and backward models which determine the mapping of the brain’s response to a stimulus (Montoya-Martínez et al., 2021). Backwards models include methods such as Support Vector Machines (SVM’s) in Multi-Variate Pattern Analysis (MVPA i.e. decoding). Decoding has enabled researchers to see information in ERPs that are otherwise difficult to see in traditional methods. Support-Vector-based decoding is a technique that has been used in studies to identify which out of many familiar animate objects were viewed (Ashton, 2022), which face an individual was looking at (Bae, 2021), and the facial expression that was seen (Bae, 2021). In employing decoding for these studies, quality and statistical power are based on the correlation between the reconstruction of the mapping and the original signal.
Typically, EEG systems recording with 64 or more electrodes are used (Montoya-Martínez et al., 2021). The benefits of recording from a large number of electrodes includes a greater number of points on the scalp to measure from, however, it comes with several disadvantages. Recording from more electrodes introduces longer set-up times, more equipment and expenses for this, and more data to process and store. Thus, transitioning to a more cost-effective and efficient method of measuring EEG data, with negligible impact on application has been well-established in EEG research (Abhijith et al., 2021). However, as our methods for

comprehension of brain function advance, researchers are increasingly leveraging computational neuroscience to enhance the capacity of EEG as a robust classification tool by implementing Machine Learning (ML) techniques in decoding methods. In this work, we will assess the impact of electrode placement and number in SVM decoding method. For decoding purposes, there is a need to establish whether these same concerns for electrode placement and number, are present in decoding research. In this study, we will focus on enhancing the EEG decoding process by identifying the interplay between electrode number and positioning in decoding accuracy. We will begin by using the state of current research in regards to electrode placement and number of electrodes before looking at these factors against a visual attention decoding task.

**1.1 How might machine learning models for decoding be enhanced?**
Machine learning techniques are often implemented using MVPA-based decoding to classify various neural signals such as those from EEG, fMRI, and single-unit firing rates. Utilizing machine learning algorithms to decode EEG signals involves identifying the optimal strategy for distinguishing voltage patterns associated with different "classes."

**1.2 EEG Methodology for Mapping Stimulus onto Brain Activity**
The importance of electrode placement and number is well-established in traditional EEG research. The International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology established stipulations on positioning and coverage of electrodes over the scalp to unify the approach to EEG recordings (Klem et al., 1999). It was recommended that placement and nomenclature of electrodes were standardized according to a system that would account for variability in patient skull size according to the distances between four anatomic landmarks (Beam et al., 2009) which would determine the inter-electrode spacing and placement of electrodes on the scalp. Thus, the initial 10-20 system (Jasper et al., 1958; Towle et al., 1993) was implemented. Furthermore, in addition to skull size, the influence of skull shape and cortical anatomy on the selection of electrodes has demonstrated that individual variations in cortical anatomy necessitate the use of additional electrodes (Morris et al., 1986; American Electroencephalographic Society Society, 1991; Towle
 et al., 1992). For this reason, the wide-spread recommendation to use the 10-20 system for clinical applications (Nuwer et al., 1998), has expanded substantially over the past decade with the introduction of higher-density systems such as the 10-10 and 10-5 systems (Le et al., 1998; Oostenveld & Praamstra, 2001). Each of these configurations has increased the number of electrodes available to researchers. The general finding is that configurations with a greater number of electrodes (64-256 electrodes) provide better spatial resolution and more precise mapping of stimuli onto brain activity (Seeck et al., 2017). The scope of research on optimizing electrode placement and number, has expanded into the use of computational models to develop utility algorithms for electrode selection.

****1.3 Studies of EEG Electrode Density and Placement in Decoding Electrode Selection Strategies in Decoding for Auditory and Speech Tasks****
The scope of research on optimizing electrode placement and number, has expanded into the use of computational models to develop utility metric algorithms for electrode selection. Montoya- Martínez et al. (2021) proposed a utility-based selection strategy for node selection in an auditory attention task. The utility metric implemented, removed channels one by one according to their influence on the correlation between the original and reconstructed signal. They found that removing electrodes using the utility metric greatly improved decoding performance, where the optimal number of channels were between 20-30 channels. Mundanad, Narayanan and Bertrand (2019) followed a similar strategy, but instead used a greedy utility metric selection method for an auditory task. The greedy utility metric ... They found that one can use between 10-25 electrode channels before correlations are negatively impacted.
However, developing channel selection strategies tailored to each individual demands considerable time and resources. Therefore, labs need an alternative to algorithm-based node selection for decoding. Moreover, current studies predominantly focus on decoding methods for speech and auditory tasks, resulting in variability in electrode position and number for visual tasks. Consequently, there is a gap in the literature regarding the significance of electrode placement and number in SVM-based decoding research for visual tasks. This study aims to address this gap by investigating how different electrode

configurations varying in electrode number and placement influences the effectiveness of EEG signal decoding.

**1.6 The Present Study******
In this study, we utilized 64-electrode data from an affective visual scene task. To evaluate the impact of electrode number and placement on decoding accuracy, we examined two aspects of the ideal electrode configuration for visual tasks. For electrode placement, we focused on two variations: distributed versus occipitally focused configurations. To assess the effect of electrode number on decoding performance, we analyzed subsets of the initial 64-electrode data, using configurations of 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 electrodes.

**1.7 Predictions.******
[Like all sections of your paper, references start on their own page, as shown on the page that follows. The body of the References section uses the Bibliography style. For more detailed information on formatting references, see the APA Style Manual, 6th Edition. (Last Name, Year)

